Article first draft (#135)
hassanobeid1994/tr_b_causal_2020: article/sections/_2_graph_importance.tex

\section{Perils of disregard}
\label{sec:graph-importance}

> Consider the proposals from the following fictitious scenarios: 

Author: Hey Amine! I think it'd be a good idea to link back to the introduction. Right now, Section 2 seems completely disconnected from Section 1.

Author: Note however, I like your choice of starting with two transpo scenarios that highlight the causal nature of transport projects, and I think you should keep it. I'm hoping you can insert a new first sentence that will link back to Section 1.

- Based on input from the public, the Department of Transportation (DOT) of  is considering implementing a new parking policy. 
This proposed policy would put in place pricing changes and parking restrictions that would discourage individuals from parking in the central business district. 
The DOT (and its constituents) believes that this policy would encourage people to use more active transportation modes (e.g: walking, biking, etc..).
- A certain DOT is considering constructing a streetcar (trolley, tram) line in a low/mid-income area in its jurisdiction.
Citing examples from other cities and countries, the DOT claims that the new streetcar line will create more transit oriented
developments and increase economic activity in the areas surrounding the proposed project. 

%% TODO: Present an example or two of real life project proposals?

Thinking more closely about these proposals, it is clear that they assume a causal relationship between the proposed project/policy and the desired goals. 

> The DOT in question completed data analysis that allowed them to conclude that putting such policy or project in place would result in cause the desired output and achieve the desired goal.

Author: ```suggestion
The DOT in question analyzed data, concluding that such a policy or project would cause the desired output and achieve the desired goal.
```

Reviewer: Solved in new branch.

In the presented scenarios, the DOT claims that implementing the new parking policy will cause an increase the share of 

> active transportation modes in the central business district and constructing the proposed streetcar line will 

Author: ```suggestion
active transportation modes in the central business district and that constructing the proposed streetcar line will 
```

> cause an increase more transit oriented developments and economic activity.

Author: ```suggestion
cause more transit oriented developments and economic activity.
```

Policymakers base their analyses and conclusions on hypotheses or beliefs of how the world operates.
In other words, the data analysis is based on a certain belief about the data generating process.

> Yet, policymakers often do not present their beliefs about such data generating process.

Author: I know yet and however **can** be used interchangeably. I just wonder if we should do so since people may mistake the usage of "yet" = "however" as "yet" = "so far".
```suggestion
However, policymakers often do not present their beliefs about such data generating process.
```

Reviewer: Addressed in new branch.

As a result, these proposals maintain an obscure representation of how the policy or project will achieve their desired goals. 

> Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) allow one to clearly encode their assumptions about the data generating process and the problem at hand.

Author: DAGs are defined in section 1 so no need to do so again.
```suggestion
DAGs allow one to clearly encode their assumptions about the data generating process and the problem at hand.
```

Reviewer: Addressed.

> Researchers and practitioners have made use of DAGs in fields such as epidemiology, scheduling, and network structures and have found them to be practical.

Author: For each discipline listed, add links to review papers that provide supporting evidence for this point.

%% TODO: maybe insert some references of where DAGs were used?.

> DAGs could show to be very useful in addressing transportation policy questions, similar to the ones presented above.

Author: ```suggestion
Likewise, as in the fields presented above, DAGs could prove useful in addressing transportation policy questions.
```

Reviewer: Addressed in new branch.

\citet{brathwaite_2018_causal} have proposed a framework illustrating how practitioners and researchers can use DAGs
 to answer such transportation modeling questions in a causal context.

> \citet{brathwaite_2018_causal}, however, have not shown an empirical application of their framework and how it results

Author: Putting the conjunction at the beginning of the sentence to keep the subject of the sentence next to its verb for maximum clarity.
```suggestion
However, \citet{brathwaite_2018_causal} have not shown an empirical application of their framework and how it results
```

Reviewer: Addressed in new branch.

 in different conclusions when compared to traditional modeling approaches.

In this section, we will present an example illustrating the importance of using DAGs in transportation demand modeling efforts. 

> More specifically, we will illustrate how different assumptions about the data generating process result in different conclusions.

Author: ```suggestion
Specifically, we illustrate how different assumptions about the data generating process result in different conclusions.
```

Reviewer: Addressed in new branch.

> We approach this exercise by building up on \citet{brathwaite_2018_causal} work by going through 

Author: ```suggestion
To make our point, we build upon \citet{brathwaite_2018_causal}.
```

Reviewer: Addressed in new branch.

> an empirical exercise of a simplified transportation modeling problem.

Author: ```suggestion
Here, we present an empirical exercise using a simplified transportation modeling problem.
```

Author: Also, somewhere in this section (perhaps as a footnote), can you explicitly link to the project repo and where you perform the simulation?

> Before going any further, we would like to note that this example is for

Author: ```suggestion
Before going any further, we note that this example is
```

> illustrative purposes and does not reflect the complexities of a typical transportation choice modeling problem.

Author: ```suggestion
illustrative, and it does not reflect all complexities in a typical transportation choice modeling problem.
```

Let us assume that a company wants to reduce its workforce carbon footprint by moving its employees closer to their campus. 

> This action could lead to more employees not driving to work.

Author: Totally true, but if I am understanding this paragraph correctly, you could omit this sentence without any harm to reader comprehension.
```suggestion

```

We would like to forecast how such an intervention would change the share of employees driving to work.
We model this travel mode choice problem based on a dataset from \citet{brathwaite_asymmetric}.

> This dataset is based on the 2012 California Household Travel Survey (CHTS).

Author: You never use the acronym again so there's no need to introduce it.
```suggestion
This dataset is based on the 2012 California Household Travel Survey, and it
```

> The dataset contains approximately 4000 home-based school or work tours made by approximately 3850 individuals in the California Bay area.

Author: ```suggestion
contains approximately 4000 home-based school or work tours made by approximately 3850 individuals in the California Bay area.
```

Readers interested in a more detailed description of the dataset can refer to \citet{brathwaite_asymmetric}.

> Our goal in this section is not to recover the causal effect of the proposed intervention.
> We aim to only show how different DAGs would result in different conclusions about the impact of the proposed intervention.

Author: I think it'd be a good idea to move these two sentences to be the last two sentences of the previous paragraph.
```suggestion
Indeed, our goal in this section is not to recover the causal effect of the proposed intervention.
Instead, we aim to show how different DAGs result in different conclusions about the effect of the proposed intervention.
```

For purposes of this exercise, we consider the Multinomial Logit model defined in \citet{brathwaite_asymmetric} as the true outcome generating process.

The systematic utility equations of the adopted multinomial logit model are specified as follows:

\[ U_{da} = \beta_{travel time} \times Travel Time + \beta_{cost per distance da} \times Cost per Distance_{da} + \beta_{autos}  \times Number of Autos \]

> \[ U_{sr2} = ASC_{sr2} + \beta_{time drive} \times Travel Time + \beta_{cost per distance sr2} \times Cost per Distance_{sr2} + \beta_{autos}  \times Number of Autos + \beta_{cross bay} \times Cross Bay + \beta_{hh size} \times HH Size + \beta_{n kids hh} \times Number of kids \]

Author: U_{sr2} and U_{sr3} are too long to fit on one line. Please put line breaks in your equation and align the elements of the equations. See the equation here for an example: https://github.com/timothyb0912/dissertation/blob/master/chapter3/current/ch3.tex#L18

\[ U_{sr3+} = ASC_{sr3+} + \beta_{time drive} \times Travel Time + \beta_{cost per distance sr3+} \times Cost per Distance_{sr3+} + \beta_{autos}  \times Number of Autos + \beta_{cross bay} \times Cross Bay + \beta_{hh size} \times HH Size + \beta_{n kids hh} \times Number of kids \]
\[ U_{WTW} = ASC_{WTW} + \beta_{travel time transit} \times Travel Time + \beta_{travel cost} \times Travel Cost \]
\[ U_{DTW} = ASC_{DTW} + \beta_{travel time transit} \times Travel Time + \beta_{travel cost} \times Travel Cost \]
\[ U_{WTD} = ASC_{WTD} + \beta_{travel time transit} \times Travel Time + \beta_{travel cost} \times Travel Cost \]
\[ U_{Bike} = ASC_{Bike} + \beta_{travel distance bike} \times Travel Distance \]

> \[ U_{Walk} = ASC_{Walk} + \beta_{travel distance walk} \times Travel Distance \]

Author: - Please put these equations in a single equation block (`\begin{equation} ... \end{equation}`) so that they'll be grouped together and given a single equation number.
- Please wrap your coefficient subscripts in `\textrm{ ... }` and use underscores instead of spaces within those `\textrm` blocks. The spaces don't natively appear in the subscript and when used in `\textrm` as subscripts, it's hard to read. Note that the underscores need to be escaped. E.g., `\beta_{ \textrm{ travel\_distance\_bike } }`.
- When you break the equations so they fit on one line, please align the starting location of the first element on the new line. So include `\begin{aligned}` and `\end{aligned}` in your equation block. When not on a continuation line, please align on the equals sign of the various equations. In other words, replace `=` with `&=`. For an example of such alignments, see the use of the ampersand characters [here](https://github.com/timothyb0912/dissertation/blob/master/chapter3/current/ch3.tex#L18).
- For multi-word variable names (e.g. `Cost per Distance_{sr3+}`), wrap them with `\textrm` and use underscores instead of spaces. For example, `Cost per Distance_{sr3+}` to `\textrm{ Cost\_per\_Distance}_{ \textrm{sr3+} }`

> We achieve our goal through a simulation exercise as follows:

Author: My suggestion below adds a link to the previous paragraph and describes what we did without ascribing a status to our efforts (e.g. no achieved our goal or didn't).
Let's leave it to readers to decide if our simulation accomplished our goal of demonstrating to them how differing causal assumptions lead to differing causal inferences.
```suggestion
Using the setup described above, we conduct our simulation exercise as follows:
```

Reviewer: Addressed in new branch.

> 1. We build a DAG (graph 1) where we assume with all explanatory variables independent of each other. 

Author: ```suggestion
1. We build a DAG (graph 1) where we assume all explanatory variables are independent of each other. 
```

> 2. We simulate data based on this graph and generate outcomes based the chosen multinomial logit model.

Author: ```suggestion
2. We simulate data based on this graph and generate outcomes based on a chosen ``true'' multinomial logit model.
```

Reviewer: addressed in new branch.

> 4. We predict outcomes based on the mode choice model.

Author: Incorrect number, but this should all go away when switching to `\begin{enumerate}` and `\item` to denote enumerated items rather than numbering them by hand (which can be error-prone, as we see).
```suggestion
3. We predict outcomes based on the mode choice model.
```

> 3. We apply the do-operator \citet{pearl_causality_2000} to reduce the travel distance for all individuals in the dataset and emulate a company's decision to move its employees closer to campus.

Author: ```suggestion
4. We apply the do-operator \citet{pearl_causality_2000} to our simulated data to reduce the travel distance for all individuals in the dataset. This emulates a company's decision to move its employees closer to campus.
```

4. We predict new outcomes based on the mode choice model.

> 

Author: Note that in a latex list, the same effect can be achieved by adding `\newline` to the end of one's list item.
```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Addressed in new branch.

> 5. We build a different DAG (graph 2) for each utility function based on assumptions of how explanatory variables interact and influence the outcome.

Author: ```suggestion
5. We build a different DAG (Figure \ref{fig:DA_causal_2}) for each utility function based on assumptions of how explanatory variables interact and influence the outcome.
```

> 6. We use the data at hand to estimate the relationships between different variables outlined in graph 2 .

Author: ```suggestion
6. We use the real dataset to estimate the relationships between different variables outlined in Figure \ref{fig:DA_causal_2} .
```

> 7. We simulate data for variables not affected by any other nodes in graph 2 and use the estimated relationships from step 6 to simulate the remaining explanatory variables.

Author: ```suggestion
7. We simulate data for variables without parent nodes in Figure \ref{fig:DA_causal_2}, and we use the estimated relationships from step 6 to simulate the remaining explanatory variables.
```

8. We then use the choice model to simulate outcome choices based on data simulated for graph 2.

> 9. We apply the do-operator to reduce the travel distance for all individuals in the dataset  and emulate a company's decision to move its employees closer to campus.

Author: ```suggestion
9. We apply the do-operator, as above, to reduce the travel distance for all individuals in the dataset and to emulate a company's decision to move its employees closer to campus.
```

> 10. We use the estimated relationships from step 6 to simulate all the explanatory variables in graph 2 (namely the variables affected by travel distance).

Author: Note I removed explicit reference to the step number because it can be hard to keep track of, especially if the numbering of steps changes.
```suggestion
10. We use the estimated relationships for this causal graph to simulate all the explanatory variables in Figure \ref{fig:DA_causal_2} (namely the variables affected by travel distance).
```

> 11. We use the estimated choice model to produce outcomes based on the simulated data from step 10.

Author: For the numbered list, please use `\begin{enumerate} \item ... \item ... \end{enumerate}` so the list displays correctly when compiled. See [Latex List Structures](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/LaTeX/List_Structures).

Reviewer: Addressed in new branch.

> 11. We use the estimated choice model to produce outcomes based on the simulated data from step 10.

Author: ```suggestion
11. We use the estimated choice model to produce outcomes based on the simulated data from the previous step.
```

\begin{figure}
   \centering
   \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{Independent_graph.png}
   \caption{Causal Graph with Independent Covariates}
   \label{fig:IND_GRAPH}
\end{figure}

For our purposes, we assume that there are no latent variables.
The variables were chosen based on the specification of the MNL model outlined in \citet{brathwaite_asymmetric}.
We can describe the variables as follows:
- Total Travel Distance: is the total travel distance for individual i and mode j, for all available modes for individual i during trip t of tour l.
- Total Travel Cost: is the travel cost in dollars for individual i and mode j, for all available modes for individual i during trip t of tour l.
- Total travel time: is the travel time in minutes for individual i and mode j, for all available modes for individual i during trip t tour l.
- Number of Autos: is the number of automobiles owned by individual i's household.
- Number of Licensed Drivers: is the number of licensed drives in individual i's household.
- Number of Kids: is the number of kids in individual i's household.

> - Cross-bay trip: is a binary variable indicating whether the trip t in tour l for individual i is a cross-bay trip.

Author: I think you should place this paragraph before the description of the causal graphs. This paragraph describes the variables in the data, so I think it's best thought of as part of the data description. Additionally, I think this information would be best presented in a table rather than text.

> Similarly, Figure \ref{fig:DA_causal_2} through \ref{fig:BIKE_causal_2} illustrate the causal graphs with "interacting" explanatory variables (graph 2).

Author: ```suggestion
Similarly, Figure \ref{fig:DA_causal_2} through \ref{fig:BIKE_causal_2} illustrate the causal graphs with ``interacting'' explanatory variables (graph 2).
```

> Each of these graphs is based on the utility function of each mode in the multinomial logit model specified in \citet{brathwaite_asymmetric}.

Author: These three paragraphs describe the causal graphs for the explanatory variables in each travel mode's utility equation. I think they should be placed before the listing of the simulation steps because these are inputs to your simulation.

I think a sensible progression for this section is:
- State main idea
- Present evidence for main idea
   - Data description
   - Causal graph descriptions
   - Simulation description
   - Simulation results

Right now, you have causal graph description after the simulation description.

> Each of these graphs is based on the utility function of each mode in the multinomial logit model specified in \citet{brathwaite_asymmetric}.

Author: I think these lines should be combined with line 86 above to make a single paragraph that describes the causal graphs shown in your figures.

   \caption{Causal Graph for the Shared Ride 3+ Utility Function}
   \label{fig:SR3_causal_2}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
   \centering
   \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{WTW_interacting_graph.png}
   \caption{Causal Graph for the Walk-Transit-Walk Utility Function}
   \label{fig:WTW_causal_2}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
   \centering
   \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{WTD_interacting_graph.png}
   \caption{Causal Graph for the Walk-Transit-Drive Utility Function}
   \label{fig:WTD_causal_2}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
   \centering
   \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{DTW_interacting_graph.png}
   \caption{Causal Graph for the Drive-Transit-Walk Utility Function}
   \label{fig:DTW_causal_2}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
   \centering
   \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{WALK_interacting_graph.png}
   \caption{Causal Graph for the Shared Ride 3+ Utility Function}
   \label{fig:WALK_causal_2}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
   \centering
   \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{BIKE_interacting_graph.png}
   \caption{Causal Graph for the Bike Utility Function}
   \label{fig:BIKE_causal_2}
\end{figure}

> Each of these graphs is based on the utility function of each respective mode in the multinomial logit model estimated in \citet{brathwaite-asymmetric}.

Author: I think this is a repeat and old sentence that mirrors line 107.
```suggestion
```

Author: Also note that this citation will not work and will result in a big bold question mark. The citation should use an underscore not a hyphen, according to the bibliography.

in our sample choosing a car centric mode before and after implementing a policy or intervention
aimed at reducing travel distance.
These differences are plotted under the two different assumptions about the data generating process illustrated in the causal graphs above.
Figure \ref{fig:histogram_probability} highlights the bias between the estimated probability of an average individual choosing a car centric mode.
This difference shows the importance of considering the data generating process when estimating transportation demand models aiming to forecast the impact of proposed policies.

\begin{figure}
   \centering
   \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{histogram_selection_on_obs.png}
   \caption{Histograms of the probability of choosing Car Centric Modes under Different Data Generating processes.}
   \label{fig:histogram_probability}
\end{figure}

The data generating process might not be easily distinguishable in the majority of situations, mainly due to the complexity of the real world.
Therefore, constructing a causal graph that represents the data generating process as much as possible is not an easy task.

> The following section explores this topic and includes some guidance on how to build and test causal graphs representing the researchers beliefs about the data generating process.

Author: ```suggestion
To prepare readers to create causal graphs, the next section will provide a brief overview of them and their history in choice modelling.
Then, Section \ref{sec:graph-construction} explores this topic and includes some guidance on how to build causal graphs representing the researchers beliefs about the data generating process.
Section \ref{sec:graph-testing} follows up with guidance on how to test one's causal graphs against one's data.
```

>    \label{fig:IND_GRAPH}

Author: In the presentation, you used these beautiful images where the arrows showing the perturbation were highlighted in red, according to each causal graph. Could you do that here? I believe you can set the color as an edge attribute for a given edge in graphviz. You should be able to do something like `graph.edge(A, B).update_attr(color="red")`
